Yesterday, another woman came forward to allege that Roy Moore, the Republican nominee for an open Senate seat in Alabama, had sexually assaulted her when she was a teenager. Her revelations came just days after The Washington Post published the story of a woman who alleged Moore had engaged in sexual misconduct toward her when she was just 14.

It's easy to counsel Republicans at this moment: Don't support the alleged sex predator. And maybe next time don't nominate the twice-disgraced former judge who even Donald Trump thought was unelectable.

But Democrats could use some counsel at this moment, too. As Republicans watch their house burn down, Democrats have a chance to get theirs in order. And that means not only reckoning with the party's own history of tolerating sexual misconduct, but preparing to put principle over party in the critical elections of 2018 and 2020.

The most pressing issue for Democrats is Bill Clinton. In his post-presidential career, Clinton has become a beloved party elder, trotted out every campaign cycle to stoke nostalgia for the "good old days" of the Democratic Party. His convention speech in 2012 was greeted with rapturous praise, and in 2016 he was a mainstay of Hillary Clinton's campaign.

But for all that, he remained a problem for the party. After a dozen women came forward to accuse Donald Trump of sexual harassment following the release of the "Access Hollywood" tape, Trump responded by bringing several of Bill Clinton's accusers to the second presidential debate. It was a desperate, disgusting ploy – one that had real power because the party had never really dealt with its Clinton problem.

Nor has it really dealt with the legacy of Ted Kennedy, another beloved Democrat. Chappaquiddick – the incident where Kennedy left his companion Mary Jo Kopechne to drown after a late-night car accident – had nothing to do with his fight for health care or the other liberal policies for which he is so admired. But it spoke to his significant privilege, and the way he treated women as, quite literally, disposable.

This is not whataboutism. The intention here is not to distract from Moore's alleged misdeeds, or for that matter, from Trump's. But for decades, most Democrats have brushed aside the wrongdoings of powerful men when it serves their interest, just as most Republicans did with Trump, and many other Republicans, especially in Alabama, are doing with Moore.

To set side-by-side Clinton, Trump, Kennedy and Moore is not to muddy the waters – the goal of whataboutism – but to clarify them. Partisanship has fractured the lens through which these men are seen, separating Clinton and Kennedy from Moore and Trump, allowing the party faithful to see the sins of one side but not the other. And that one-sided vision of wrongdoing has translated into believing women who bring allegations against politicians on one side but not the other.

And it's that, that instrumental belief in women's stories, that has to end. Believing women only when it's politically useful isn't really believing women, but believing that they can be effective political weapons. By acting as though women are only useful when they are a means to an end, it recreates the conditions that enabled them to be harassed and abused in the first place.

For Democrats, this is both a moral and a political problem. At the moment, the party has a base teeming with women activists, many of whom were drawn into party politics by the aggressively misogynistic politics of Donald Trump. But for the party to be a genuine home for these activists, Democrats must confront their mistakes and misdeeds in the realm of sexual harassment.

In practical terms, that means not having Bill Clinton speak at the 2020 convention, and keeping him off the campaign trail. It means not backing a presidential bid by Joe Biden, who has never publicly reckoned with his role in the Anita Hill hearings. It means rejecting any candidate who faces credible accusations, even if that candidate is the party's best shot at flipping the House or the Senate or the presidency.

And it means drafting and passing stronger and more thorough legislation to protect women in all parts of the workforce, including hourly workers, subcontracted laborers and freelancers, from sexual harassment and retaliation.

This year began with hundreds of thousands of women flooding the nation's capital in a peaceful, powerful protest. When they left D.C., they went home and knocked on doors and organized their communities and launched campaigns and ran for office. Last week, they swarmed the polls in places like Virginia and sent a whole lot of Democrats, and a whole lot of women, to the statehouse. These women are remaking the Democratic Party. It's time the party remade itself to be worthy of them.

